# gTranslate

**gTranslate** is a machine learning-based command-line tool for predicting the translation table (TT) used by prokaryotic genomes. By analyzing specific sequence features — such as coding density differences, Trp ratios, and Gly ratios — `gTranslate` can accurately distinguish between the genetic codes associated with reassignment of the UGA stop codon, i.e. translation tables 11 (standard prokaryotic code), 4 (UGA=Trp), and 25 (UGA=Gly).

## Features

* **Automated Table Detection:** Rapidly predict the correct translation table for a single genome or large batches of genomes.
* **Interactive Visualizations:** Generate dynamic HTML dashboards to explore the feature space used by the classifiers.

## Installation

... TBD ...

## Usage

gTranslate is operated via two subcommands: `detect_table` and `generate_plot`.

You can view the general help menu at any time:
```bash
gtranslate -h
```

### Detect table
The core pipeline for detecting the translation table used by prokaryotic organisms. You must provide input genomes either via a directory or a batch file.

**Basic Usage:**
```bash
# Process a directory of genomic FASTA files
gtranslate detect_table --genome_dir /path/to/genomes --out_dir /path/to/output

# Process genomic FASTA files defined in a batch file
gtranslate detect_table --batchfile genomes.tsv --out_dir /path/to/output
```

The file provided to `--batchfile` is a two-column, tab-separated values (TSV) file that indicates the path to the genomic FASTA file and the desired genome identifier, e.g.:
```
/example/path/GCF_001729785.1_ASM172978v1/GCF_001729785.1.fna.gz      G001729785
/a/different/path/GCF_043834535.1.fna.gz    G043834535
...
```

### Generate plot (optional)
Generates an interactive HTML dashboard to visually explore the features (e.g., coding density difference, amino acid ratios) used by gTranslate to predict the translation table. 

**Basic Usage:**
```bash
gtranslate generate_plot --feature_file features.tsv --output_file dashboard.html
```

The file `features.tsv` provided to `--feature_file` is generated by the `detect_table` command.

## Testing

Validation that gTranslate has been installed correctly and is operating as expected can be done using the `check_install` and `test` subcommands:

### Check installation
Verifies your installation and ensures that all required dependencies and reference data files are correctly configured and present.

**Basic Usage:**
```bash
gtranslate check_install
```

### Test operation of gTranslate
Runs the built-in test suite on bundled genomic data to validate that gTranslate is functioning correctly on your system.

**Basic Usage:**
```bash
gtranslate test --cpus 4
```
*Note: If `--out_dir` is not specified, the test will securely execute in a temporary directory.*
